---
title: "Camouflaged Object Detection via Complementary Information-Selected Network Based on Visual and Semantic Separation"
collection: publications
category: journal
permalink: /publication/2024-COD
date: 2024-07-25
venue: 'IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics'
authors: "Chao Yin, Kequan Yang, Jide Li, Xiaoqiang Li<sup>#</sup>, <strong>Yifan Wu</strong>"
paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10609401'
---
Camouflaged object detection (COD) is a promising yet challenging task that aims to segment objects concealed within intricate surroundings, a capability crucial for modern industrial applications. Current COD methods primarily focus on the direct fusion of high-level and low-level information, without considering their differences and inconsistencies. Consequently, accurately segmenting highly camouflaged objects in challenging scenarios presents a considerable problem. To mitigate this concern, we propose a novel framework called visual and semantic separation network (VSSNet), which separately extracts low-level visual and high-level semantic cues and adaptively combines them for accurate predictions. Specifically, it features the information extractor module for capturing dimension-aware visual or semantic information from various perspectives. The complementary information-selected module leverages the complementary nature of visual and semantic information for adaptive selection and fusion. In addition, the region disparity weighting strategy encourages the model to prioritize the boundaries of highly camouflaged and difficult-to-predict objects. Experimental results on benchmark datasets show the VSSNet significantly outperforms State-of-the-Art COD approaches without data augmentations and multiscale training techniques. Furthermore, our method demonstrates satisfactory cross-domain generalization performance in real-world industrial environments.
